doc/tutorials/basic/develop_notebook.md, before:

# Develop in a Notebook

Welcome to the "Develop in a Notebook" section! Here, we'll explore the fundamentals of efficiently developing Panel apps directly within a notebook environment.

Let's dive in!

## Preview Your App

Let's preview our app.

Start by creating a new notebook named `app.ipynb`.

### Preview Example

Here's a simple notebook containing a Panel app:

![Panel Notebook Example App](../../_static/images/develop_notebook_simple_example.png)

Copy and paste the following code cells into your notebook:

```python
import panel as pn

pn.extension()
```

```python
pn.panel("Hello World").servable()
```

```python
pn.panel("Hello Again")
```

Run the cells and save the notebook as `app.ipynb`.

You can now preview the app by clicking the *Jupyter Panel Preview* icon. This icon can be found above the notebook.

![Jupyter Panel Preview](../../_static/images/develop_notebook_simple_example_open_preview.png)

Upon clicking the *Jupyter Panel Preview* icon, you'll see your app launch in a separate window. If "Hello Again" isn't displayed, it's because it hasn't been marked as `.servable()`. Update the cell containing `pn.panel("Hello Again")` to include `.servable()` and save the notebook. Click the *Reload Preview* button in the *Jupyter Panel Preview*.

It should look like

![Reloaded Preview](../../_static/images/develop_notebook_simple_example_add_hello_again.png)

:::{tip}
You can enhance your workflow by enabling *auto-reload* with the *Render on Save* option, which automatically reloads your app when the notebook is saved.
:::

The video shows how a larger app could be developed.

<video controls="" poster="../../_static/images/jupyter_panel_preview_in_action.png">
    <source src="https://assets.holoviz.org/panel/tutorials/jupyter_panel_preview_in_action.mp4" type="video/mp4" style="max-height: 400px; max-width: 100%;">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Serve Your App with Autoreload

Alternatively, you can serve your notebook externally with autoreload using the following command:

```bash
panel serve app.ipynb --autoreload
```

This method provides a faster alternative to the *Jupyter Panel Preview*. Check out the video for inspiration.

<video controls="" poster="../../_static/images/develop_notebook_panel_serve_after.png">
    <source src="https://assets.holoviz.org/panel/tutorials/develop_notebook_panel_serve.mp4" type="video/mp4" style="max-height: 400px; max-width: 100%;">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

:::{dropdown} Code

```python
import panel as pn
import numpy as np

from matplotlib.figure import Figure

ACCENT = "goldenrod"
LOGO = "https://assets.holoviz.org/panel/tutorials/matplotlib-logo.png"

pn.extension(sizing_mode="stretch_width")
```

```python
data = np.random.normal(1, 1, size=100)
fig = Figure(figsize=(8,4))
ax = fig.subplots()
ax.hist(data, bins=20, color=ACCENT)

component = pn.pane.Matplotlib(fig, format='svg', sizing_mode='scale_both')

pn.template.FastListTemplate(
    title="My App", sidebar=[LOGO], main=[component], accent=ACCENT
).servable();
```

:::

## Inspect a Component using `SHIFT+Tab`

Start from an empty notebook named `app.ipynb`.

Copy-paste the code below into the first cell

```python
import panel as pn

pn.extension()
```

Run the cell.

Write `pn.widgets.IntSlider` in a cell and press `SHIFT+Tab`.

It should look like

![Inspect a Panel component using SHIFT+Tab](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_shift_tab.png)

Use the mouse to scroll down until we find the *Example* code snippet and *Reference* link.

![Inspect a Panel component using SHIFT+Tab](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_shift_tab_link.png)

Click the *Reference* link <a href="https://panel.holoviz.org/reference/widgets/IntSlider.html" target="_blank">https://panel.holoviz.org/reference/widgets/IntSlider.html</a>.

It should now look like

[![IntSlider Reference Documentation](../../_static/images/notebook_intslider_reference_doc.png)](https://panel.holoviz.org/reference/widgets/IntSlider.html)

:::{tip}
It is a great idea to use the *Example* code snippets and *Reference* links to speed up our workflow.
:::

## Inspect a Component using `print`

Start from an empty notebook named `app.ipynb`.

Copy-paste the code below into the notebook.

```python
import panel as pn

pn.extension()
```

```python
print(pn.panel("Hello World"))
```

```python
component = pn.Column(
    "Hello World", pn.widgets.IntSlider(value=2, end=10, name="Value")
)
print(component)
```

Run the cells if they have not already been run.

It should look like

![Inspect a Panel component](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_print.png)

:::{note}
By printing *layout* components like `Column` we can understand how they are composed. This enables us to *access* the subcomponents of the layout.
:::

Add the two code cells below

```python
component[0]
```

```python
component[1]
```

Run the cells if they have not already been run.

It should look like

![Inspect a Panel component](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_print_1.png)

## Inspect a Component's Parameters using `.param`

Start from an empty notebook named `app.ipynb`.

Copy-paste the two code cells below into the notebook.

```python
import panel as pn

pn.extension()
```

```python
pn.widgets.IntSlider.param
```

Run the cells if they have not already been run.

It should look like

![Inspect a Panel component class with .param](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_param_class.png)

:::{note}
- The `.param` table shows us the **default** parameter values of the `IntSlider` **class**. For example, the *default* value of `align` is `'start'`.
- The `.param` table shows us additional information like the `Type` and `Range` of the Parameter.
:::

Add the new cell

```python
pn.widgets.IntSlider(align="end").param
```

Run the code cell.

It should look like

![Inspect a Panel component instance with .param](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_param_instance.png)

:::{note}
- In the picture above we see the **actual** parameter values of the `IntSlider` **instance**. For example, the *actual* value of `align` is `'end'`.
:::

## Recap

In this section, we covered:

- Previewing a notebook app with the *Jupyter Panel Preview*.
- Serving a notebook app with autoreload.
- Inspecting components using `SHIFT+Tab`, `print`, and `.param`.

Now you're equipped with the tools to efficiently develop Panel apps directly within a notebook environment!

## Resources

For more detailed instructions and explanations, check out the resources below:

- [Develop in Other Notebook Environments](../../how_to/notebook/notebook.md)
- [Display Output in Notebooks](../../how_to/notebook/notebook.md)
- [Preview Apps in JupyterLab](../../how_to/notebook/jupyterlabpreview.md)
- [Serve an App from a Notebook File](serve.md)
- [Use VS Code Notebook and Interactive Environment](https://panel.holoviz.org//how_to/editor/vscode_configure.html#notebook-and-interactive-environment)

Happy developing! 🚀

Commit message:

update layout builder docs to align with 1.4.1a1

doc/tutorials/basic/develop_notebook.md, after:

# Develop in a Notebook

Welcome to the "Develop in a Notebook" section! Here, we'll explore the fundamentals of efficiently developing Panel apps directly within a notebook environment.

Let's dive in!

## Preview Your App

Let's preview our app.

Start by creating a new notebook named `app.ipynb`.

### Preview Example

Here's a simple notebook containing a Panel app:

![Panel Notebook Example App](../../_static/images/develop_notebook_simple_example.png)

Copy and paste the following code cells into your notebook:

```python
import panel as pn

pn.extension()
```

```python
pn.panel("Hello World").servable()
```

```python
pn.panel("Hello Again")
```

Run the cells and save the notebook as `app.ipynb`.

You can now preview the app by clicking the *Jupyter Panel Preview* icon. This icon can be found above the notebook.

![Jupyter Panel Preview](../../_static/images/develop_notebook_simple_example_open_preview.png)

Upon clicking the *Jupyter Panel Preview* icon, you'll see your app launch in a separate window. If "Hello Again" isn't displayed, it's because it hasn't been marked as `.servable()`. Update the cell containing `pn.panel("Hello Again")` to include `.servable()` and save the notebook. Click the *Reload Preview* button in the *Jupyter Panel Preview*.

It should look like

![Reloaded Preview](../../_static/images/develop_notebook_simple_example_add_hello_again.png)

:::{tip}
You can enhance your workflow by enabling *auto-reload* with the *Render on Save* option, which automatically reloads your app when the notebook is saved.
:::

The video shows how a larger app could be developed.

<video controls="" poster="../../_static/images/jupyter_panel_preview_in_action.png">
    <source src="https://assets.holoviz.org/panel/tutorials/jupyter_panel_preview_in_action.mp4" type="video/mp4" style="max-height: 400px; max-width: 100%;">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Serve Your App with Autoreload

Alternatively, you can serve your notebook externally with autoreload using the following command:

```bash
panel serve app.ipynb --autoreload
```

This method provides a faster alternative to the *Jupyter Panel Preview*. Check out the video for inspiration.

<video controls="" poster="../../_static/images/develop_notebook_panel_serve_after.png">
    <source src="https://assets.holoviz.org/panel/tutorials/develop_notebook_panel_serve.mp4" type="video/mp4" style="max-height: 400px; max-width: 100%;">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

:::{dropdown} Code

```python
import panel as pn
import numpy as np

from matplotlib.figure import Figure

ACCENT = "goldenrod"
LOGO = "https://assets.holoviz.org/panel/tutorials/matplotlib-logo.png"

pn.extension(sizing_mode="stretch_width")
```

```python
data = np.random.normal(1, 1, size=100)
fig = Figure(figsize=(8,4))
ax = fig.subplots()
ax.hist(data, bins=20, color=ACCENT)

component = pn.pane.Matplotlib(fig, format='svg', sizing_mode='scale_both')

pn.template.FastListTemplate(
    title="My App", sidebar=[LOGO], main=[component], accent=ACCENT
).servable();
```

:::

## Inspect a Component using `SHIFT+Tab`

Start from an empty notebook named `app.ipynb`.

Copy-paste the code below into the first cell

```python
import panel as pn

pn.extension()
```

Run the cell.

Write `pn.widgets.IntSlider` in a cell and press `SHIFT+Tab`.

It should look like

![Inspect a Panel component using SHIFT+Tab](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_shift_tab.png)

Use the mouse to scroll down until we find the *Example* code snippet and *Reference* link.

![Inspect a Panel component using SHIFT+Tab](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_shift_tab_link.png)

Click the *Reference* link <a href="https://panel.holoviz.org/reference/widgets/IntSlider.html" target="_blank">https://panel.holoviz.org/reference/widgets/IntSlider.html</a>.

It should now look like

[![IntSlider Reference Documentation](../../_static/images/notebook_intslider_reference_doc.png)](https://panel.holoviz.org/reference/widgets/IntSlider.html)

:::{tip}
It is a great idea to use the *Example* code snippets and *Reference* links to speed up our workflow.
:::

## Inspect a Component using `print`

Start from an empty notebook named `app.ipynb`.

Copy-paste the code below into the notebook.

```python
import panel as pn

pn.extension()
```

```python
print(pn.panel("Hello World"))
```

```python
component = pn.Column(
    "Hello World", pn.widgets.IntSlider(value=2, end=10, name="Value")
)
print(component)
```

Run the cells if they have not already been run.

It should look like

![Inspect a Panel component](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_print.png)

:::{note}
By printing *layout* components like `Column` we can understand how they are composed. This enables us to *access* the subcomponents of the layout.
:::

Add the two code cells below

```python
component[0]
```

```python
component[1]
```

Run the cells if they have not already been run.

It should look like

![Inspect a Panel component](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_print_1.png)

## Inspect a Component's Parameters using `.param`

Start from an empty notebook named `app.ipynb`.

Copy-paste the two code cells below into the notebook.

```python
import panel as pn

pn.extension()
```

```python
pn.widgets.IntSlider.param
```

Run the cells if they have not already been run.

It should look like

![Inspect a Panel component class with .param](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_param_class.png)

:::{note}
- The `.param` table shows us the **default** parameter values of the `IntSlider` **class**. For example, the *default* value of `align` is `'start'`.
- The `.param` table shows us additional information like the `Type` and `Range` of the Parameter.
:::

Add the new cell

```python
pn.widgets.IntSlider(align="end").param
```

Run the code cell.

It should look like

![Inspect a Panel component instance with .param](../../_static/images/notebook_inspect_param_instance.png)

:::{note}
- In the picture above we see the **actual** parameter values of the `IntSlider` **instance**. For example, the *actual* value of `align` is `'end'`.
:::

## Recap

In this section, we covered:

- Previewing a notebook app with the *Jupyter Panel Preview*.
- Serving a notebook app with autoreload.
- Inspecting components using `SHIFT+Tab`, `print`, and `.param`.

Now you're equipped with the tools to efficiently develop Panel apps directly within a notebook environment!

## Resources

For more detailed instructions and explanations, check out the resources below:

- [Develop in Other Notebook Environments](../../how_to/notebook/notebook.md)
- [Display Output in Notebooks](../../how_to/notebook/notebook.md)
- [Preview Apps in JupyterLab](../../how_to/notebook/jupyterlabpreview.md)
- [Publish a Notebook as a Dashboard using the Layout Builder](../../how_to/notebook/layout_builder.md)
- [Serve an App from a Notebook File](serve.md)
- [Use VS Code Notebook and Interactive Environment](https://panel.holoviz.org//how_to/editor/vscode_configure.html#notebook-and-interactive-environment)

Happy developing! 🚀
