doc/tutorials/index.md, before:

# Tutorials

These tutorials provides you with **a structured and step-by-step learning path** to **go from Zero to Hero**.

Each guide gradually builds on the previous ones, but it's structured to separate topics, so that you can go directly to a specific topic of interest and start learning.

We will assume you have successfully been able to [install Panel](../getting_started/installation.md) as described in the [Getting Started Guide](../getting_started/index.md). If not please reach out for help on [Discord](https://discord.gg/rb6gPXbdAr).

---

## Basic

These tutorials are for you that is just starting to discover Panel.

You will learn to develop and deploy amazing tools and apps that can be contained within a single Python file or notebook.

::::{grid} 1 2 2 3
:gutter: 1 1 1 2

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`browser;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Serve Apps
:link: beginner/panel_serve
:link-type: doc

Learn how to serve an app with autoreload using the `panel serve` command.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`code;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Develop in an Editor
:link: beginner/develop_editor
:link-type: doc

Learn the basics of developing Panel apps in an editor
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`note;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Develop in a Notebook
:link: beginner/develop_notebook
:link-type: doc

Learn the basics of developing Panel apps in a notebook
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`zap;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Display objects with `pn.panel`
:link: beginner/display_pn_panel
:link-type: doc

Learn how to display objects easily and flexibly with `pn.panel`.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`plug;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Param
:link: param
:link-type: doc

Panel and other projects in the HoloViz ecosystem all build on Param. In this section you will learn the basic concepts behind Param that you need to know to become an effective user of Panel.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`pulse;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Interactivity
:link: interactivity
:link-type: doc

In this section you learn how to leverage Parameters and dependencies on parameters to add interactivity. In particular we will focus on implementing interactivity through reactivity, rather than the more imperative style of programming you might be used to from other UI frameworks.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`browser;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Effective Development
:link: development
:link-type: doc

In this section we will introduce you to the most important concepts you need to know to become an effective Panel developer in notebooks and your favorite editor.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`rows;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Layouts
:link: layouts
:link-type: doc

In this section we will discover how layouts and sizing works in Panel, taking you through the difference between inherent sizing, fixed sizing and responsive sizing and then cover responsive layouts.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`code;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Structuring Applications
:link: structure
:link-type: doc

In this section we will take you through the process of structuring a more complex application, discussing different approaches for managing reactivity and how to create a composable architecture for your applications.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`paintbrush;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Styling
:link: styling
:link-type: doc

In this section we will review different approaches for styling components, from applying `Design` components, through applying `stylesheets` and `css_classes`.
:::

::::

```{toctree}
:titlesonly:
:hidden:
:maxdepth: 2

beginner/panel_serve
beginner/develop_editor
beginner/develop_notebook
beginner/display_pn_panel
param
interactivity
development
layouts
structure
styling
```

---

## Intermediate

These tutorials are for you that is ready to navigate and explore more advanced features of Panel.

You will learn to develop and deploy complex tools and multi-page apps that can support more demanding use cases.

::::{grid} 1 2 2 3
:gutter: 1 1 1 2

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`browser;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Serve Panel Apps
:link: intermediate/panel_serve
:link-type: doc

Learn to serve multi-page apps and how-to configure `panel serve`.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`code;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Develop in an Editor
:link: intermediate/develop_editor
:link-type: doc

Learn more advanced features like debugging to develop efficiently with Panel in an editor
:::

::::

```{toctree}
:titlesonly:
:hidden:
:maxdepth: 2

intermediate/panel_serve
intermediate/develop_editor
```

---

## Advanced

These tutorials are for you that that is ready to pioneer and push the boundaries of what can be achieved with Panel.

You will learn how to customize and extend Panel to support your domain or specialized use cases.

Commit message:

add Panes tutorial and improve a lot

doc/tutorials/index.md, after:

# Tutorials

These tutorials provides you with **a structured and step-by-step learning path** to **go from Zero to Hero**.

Each guide gradually builds on the previous ones, but it's structured to separate topics, so that you can go directly to a specific topic of interest and start learning.

We will assume you have successfully been able to [install Panel](../getting_started/installation.md) as described in the [Getting Started Guide](../getting_started/index.md). If not please reach out for help on [Discord](https://discord.gg/rb6gPXbdAr).

---

## Basic

These tutorials are for you that is just starting to discover Panel.

You will learn to develop and deploy amazing tools and apps that can be contained within a single Python file or notebook.

::::{grid} 1 2 2 3
:gutter: 1 1 1 2

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`browser;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Serve Apps
:link: beginner/panel_serve
:link-type: doc

Learn how to serve apps with `panel serve` and *autoreload*.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`code;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Develop in an Editor
:link: beginner/develop_editor
:link-type: doc

Learn the basics of developing Panel apps in an editor.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`note;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Develop in a Notebook
:link: beginner/develop_notebook
:link-type: doc

Learn the basics of developing Panel apps in a notebook.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`zap;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Display objects with `pn.panel`
:link: beginner/display_pn_panel
:link-type: doc

Learn how to display objects easily  with `pn.panel`.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`zap;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Display objects with Panes
:link: beginner/display_panes
:link-type: doc

Learn how to display objects efficiently with Panes.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`plug;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Param
:link: param
:link-type: doc

Panel and other projects in the HoloViz ecosystem all build on Param. In this section you will learn the basic concepts behind Param that you need to know to become an effective user of Panel.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`pulse;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Interactivity
:link: interactivity
:link-type: doc

In this section you learn how to leverage Parameters and dependencies on parameters to add interactivity. In particular we will focus on implementing interactivity through reactivity, rather than the more imperative style of programming you might be used to from other UI frameworks.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`browser;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Effective Development
:link: development
:link-type: doc

In this section we will introduce you to the most important concepts you need to know to become an effective Panel developer in notebooks and your favorite editor.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`rows;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Layouts
:link: layouts
:link-type: doc

In this section we will discover how layouts and sizing works in Panel, taking you through the difference between inherent sizing, fixed sizing and responsive sizing and then cover responsive layouts.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`code;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Structuring Applications
:link: structure
:link-type: doc

In this section we will take you through the process of structuring a more complex application, discussing different approaches for managing reactivity and how to create a composable architecture for your applications.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`paintbrush;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Styling
:link: styling
:link-type: doc

In this section we will review different approaches for styling components, from applying `Design` components, through applying `stylesheets` and `css_classes`.
:::

::::

```{toctree}
:titlesonly:
:hidden:
:maxdepth: 2

beginner/panel_serve
beginner/develop_editor
beginner/develop_notebook
beginner/display_pn_panel
beginner/display_panes
param
interactivity
development
layouts
structure
styling
```

---

## Intermediate

These tutorials are for you that is ready to navigate and explore more advanced features of Panel.

You will learn to develop and deploy complex tools and multi-page apps that can support more demanding use cases.

::::{grid} 1 2 2 3
:gutter: 1 1 1 2

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`browser;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Serve Panel Apps
:link: intermediate/panel_serve
:link-type: doc

Learn to serve multi-page apps and how-to configure `panel serve`.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} {octicon}`code;2.5em;sd-mr-1` Develop in an Editor
:link: intermediate/develop_editor
:link-type: doc

Learn more advanced features like debugging to develop efficiently with Panel in an editor
:::

::::

```{toctree}
:titlesonly:
:hidden:
:maxdepth: 2

intermediate/panel_serve
intermediate/develop_editor
```

---

## Advanced

These tutorials are for you that that is ready to pioneer and push the boundaries of what can be achieved with Panel.

You will learn how to customize and extend Panel to support your domain or specialized use cases.
