examples/reference/custom_components/ReactComponent.md, before:

# `ReactComponent`

`ReactComponent` simplifies the creation of custom Panel components by allowing you to write standard [React](https://react.dev/) code without the need to pre-compile or requiring a deep understanding of Javascript build tooling.

```pyodide
import panel as pn
import param

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class CounterButton(ReactComponent):

    value = param.Integer()

    _esm = """
    export function render({model}) {
      const [value, setValue] = model.useState("value");
      return (
        <button onClick={e => setValue(value+1)}>
          count is {value}
        </button>
      )
    }
    """

CounterButton().servable()
```

:::{note}

`ReactComponent` extends the [`JSComponent`](JSComponent.md) class, which allows you to create custom Panel components using JavaScript.

`ReactComponent` bears similarities to [`AnyWidget`](https://anywidget.dev/) and [`IpyReact`](https://github.com/widgetti/ipyreact), but `ReactComponent` is specifically optimized for use with Panel and React.

If you are looking to create custom components using Python and Panel component only, check out [`Viewer`](Viewer.md).

:::

## API

### ReactComponent Attributes

- **`_esm`** (str | PurePath): This attribute accepts either a string or a path that points to an [ECMAScript module](https://nodejs.org/api/esm.html#modules-ecmascript-modules). The ECMAScript module should export a `render` function which returns the HTML element to display. In a development environment such as a notebook or when using `--autoreload`, the module will automatically reload upon saving changes. You can use [`JSX`](https://react.dev/learn/writing-markup-with-jsx) and [`TypeScript`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/). The `_esm` script is transpiled on the fly using [Sucrase](https://sucrase.io/). The global namespace contains a `React` object that provides access to React hooks.
- **`_importmap`** (dict | None): This optional dictionary defines an [import map](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script/type/importmap), allowing you to customize how module specifiers are resolved.
- **`_stylesheets`** (List[str | PurePath] | None): This optional attribute accepts a list of CSS strings or paths to CSS files. It supports automatic reloading in development environments.

:::note

You may specify a path to a file as a string instead of a PurePath. The path should be specified relative to the file its specified in.

:::

#### `render` Function

The `_esm` attribute must export the `render` function. It accepts the following parameters:

- **`model`**: Represents the Parameters of the component and provides methods to `.watch` for changes, render child components using `.get_child`, create React `.useState` hooks and `.send_event` back to Python.
- **`view`**: The Bokeh view.
- **`el`**: The HTML element that the component will be rendered into.

Any React component returned from the `render` function will be appended to the HTML element (`el`) of the component.

## Usage

### Styling with CSS

Include CSS within the `_stylesheets` attribute to style the component. The CSS is injected directly into the component's HTML.

```pyodide
import panel as pn
import param

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class CounterButton(ReactComponent):

    value = param.Integer()

    _stylesheets = [
        """
        button {
            background: #0072B5;
            color: white;
            border: none;
            padding: 10px;
            border-radius: 4px;
        }
        button:hover {
            background: #4099da;
        }
        """
    ]

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
      const [value, setValue] = model.useState("value");
      return (
        <button onClick={e => setValue(value+1)}>
          count is {value}
        </button>
    );
    }
    """

CounterButton().servable()
```

## Send Events from JavaScript to Python

Events from JavaScript can be sent to Python using the `model.send_event` method. Define a handler in Python to manage these events. A *handler* is a method on the form `_handle_<name-of-event>(self, event)`:

```pyodide
import panel as pn
import param

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class EventExample(ReactComponent):

    value = param.Parameter()

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
    return (
        <button onClick={e => model.send_event('click', e) }>
          Click me
        </button>
    );
    }
    """

    def _handle_click(self, event):
       self.value = str(event.__dict__)

button = EventExample()
pn.Column(
    button, pn.widgets.TextAreaInput(value=button.param.value, height=200),
).servable()
```

You can also define and send your own custom events:

```pyodide
import datetime

import panel as pn
import param

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class CustomEventExample(ReactComponent):

    value = param.String()

    _esm = """
    function send_event(model) {
      const currentDate = new Date();
      const custom_event = new CustomEvent("click", { detail: currentDate.getTime() });
      model.send_event('click', custom_event)
    }

    export function render({ model }) {
    return (
        <button onClick={e => send_event(model) }>
          Click me
        </button>
    );
    }
    """

    def _handle_click(self, event):
        unix_timestamp = event.data["detail"]/1000
        python_datetime = datetime.datetime.fromtimestamp(unix_timestamp)
        self.value = str(python_datetime)

button = CustomEventExample()
pn.Column(
    button, button.param.value,
).servable()
```

## Dependency Imports

JavaScript dependencies can be directly imported via URLs, such as those from [`esm.sh`](https://esm.sh/).

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class ConfettiButton(ReactComponent):

    _esm = """
    import confetti from "https://esm.sh/canvas-confetti@1.6.0";

    export function render() {
      return (
        <button onClick={e => confetti()}>
          Click Me
        </button>
    );
    }
    """

ConfettiButton().servable()
```

Use the `_importmap` attribute for more concise module references.

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class ConfettiButton(ReactComponent):
    _importmap = {
        "imports": {
            "canvas-confetti": "https://esm.sh/canvas-confetti@1.6.0",
        }
    }

    _esm = """
    import confetti from "canvas-confetti";

    export function render() {
      return (
        <button onClick={e => confetti()}>
          Click Me
        </button>
      );
    }
    """

ConfettiButton().servable()
```

See [import map](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script/type/importmap) for more info about the import map format.

## External Files

You can load JSX and CSS from files by providing the paths to these files.

Create the file **counter_button.py**.

```python
from pathlib import Path

import param
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class CounterButton(ReactComponent):

    value = param.Integer()

    _esm = "counter_button.jsx"
    _stylesheets = [Path("counter_button.css")]

CounterButton().servable()
```

Now create the file **counter_button.jsx**.

```javascript
export function render({ model }) {
  const [value, setValue] = model.useState("value");
  return (
    <button onClick={e => setValue(value+1)}>
      count is {value}
    </button>
  );
}
```

Now create the file **counter_button.css**.

```css
button {
    background: #0072B5;
    color: white;
    border: none;
    padding: 10px;
    border-radius: 4px;
}
button:hover {
    background: #4099da;
}
```

Serve the app with `panel serve counter_button.py --autoreload`.

You can now edit the JSX or CSS file, and the changes will be automatically reloaded.

- Try changing `count is {value}` to `COUNT IS {value}` and observe the update.
- Try changing the background color from `#0072B5` to `#008080`.

## Displaying A Single Child

You can display Panel components (`Viewable`s) by defining a `Child` parameter.

Lets start with the simplest example

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import Child, ReactComponent

class Example(ReactComponent):

    child = Child()

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
      return <button>{model.get_child("child")}</button>
    }
    """

Example(child=pn.panel("A **Markdown** pane!")).servable()
```

If you provide a non-`Viewable` child it will automatically be converted to a `Viewable` by `pn.panel`:

```pyodide
Example(child="A **Markdown** pane!").servable()
```

If you want to allow a certain type of Panel components only you can specify the specific type in the `class_` argument.

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import Child, ReactComponent

class Example(ReactComponent):

    child = Child(class_=pn.pane.Markdown)

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
      return <button>{model.get_child("child")}</button>
    }
    """

Example(child=pn.panel("A **Markdown** pane!")).servable()
```

The `class_` argument also supports a tuple of types:

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import Child, ReactComponent

class Example(ReactComponent):

    child = Child(class_=(pn.pane.Markdown, pn.pane.HTML))

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
      return <button>{model.get_child("child")}</button>
    }
    """

Example(child=pn.panel("A **Markdown** pane!")).servable()
```

## Displaying a List of Children

You can also display a `List` of `Viewable` objects using the `Children` parameter type:

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import Children, ReactComponent

class Example(ReactComponent):

    objects = Children()

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
      return <div>{model.get_child("objects")}</div>
    }"""


Example(
    objects=[pn.panel("A **Markdown** pane!"), pn.widgets.Button(name="Click me!"), {"text": "I'm shown as a JSON Pane"}]
).servable()
```

:::note

You can change the `item_type` to a specific subtype of `Viewable` or a tuple of
`Viewable` subtypes.

:::

## Using React Hooks

The global namespace also contains a `React` object that provides access to React hooks. Here is an example of a simple counter button using the `useState` hook:

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class CounterButton(ReactComponent):

    _esm = """
    let { useState } = React;

    export function render() {
      const [value, setValue] = useState(0);
      return (
        <button onClick={e => setValue(value+1)}>
          count is {value}
        </button>
      );
    }
    """

CounterButton().servable()
```

## References

### Tutorials

- [Build Custom Components](../../../how_to/custom_components/reactive_esm/reactive_esm_layout.md)

### How-To Guides

- [Convert `AnyWidget` widgets](../../../how_to/migrate/anywidget/index.md)

### Reference Guides

- [`AnyWidgetComponent`](../../../reference/panes/AnyWidgetComponent.md)
- [`JSComponent`](../../../reference/panes/JSComponent.md)
- [`ReactComponent`](../../../reference/panes/ReactComponent.md)

Commit message:

Rename model.watch to model.on and add lifecycle handlers

examples/reference/custom_components/ReactComponent.md, after:

# `ReactComponent`

`ReactComponent` simplifies the creation of custom Panel components by allowing you to write standard [React](https://react.dev/) code without the need to pre-compile or requiring a deep understanding of Javascript build tooling.

```pyodide
import panel as pn
import param

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class CounterButton(ReactComponent):

    value = param.Integer()

    _esm = """
    export function render({model}) {
      const [value, setValue] = model.useState("value");
      return (
        <button onClick={e => setValue(value+1)}>
          count is {value}
        </button>
      )
    }
    """

CounterButton().servable()
```

:::{note}

`ReactComponent` extends the [`JSComponent`](JSComponent.md) class, which allows you to create custom Panel components using JavaScript.

`ReactComponent` bears similarities to [`AnyWidget`](https://anywidget.dev/) and [`IpyReact`](https://github.com/widgetti/ipyreact), but `ReactComponent` is specifically optimized for use with Panel and React.

If you are looking to create custom components using Python and Panel component only, check out [`Viewer`](Viewer.md).

:::

## API

### ReactComponent Attributes

- **`_esm`** (str | PurePath): This attribute accepts either a string or a path that points to an [ECMAScript module](https://nodejs.org/api/esm.html#modules-ecmascript-modules). The ECMAScript module should export a `render` function which returns the HTML element to display. In a development environment such as a notebook or when using `--autoreload`, the module will automatically reload upon saving changes. You can use [`JSX`](https://react.dev/learn/writing-markup-with-jsx) and [`TypeScript`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/). The `_esm` script is transpiled on the fly using [Sucrase](https://sucrase.io/). The global namespace contains a `React` object that provides access to React hooks.
- **`_importmap`** (dict | None): This optional dictionary defines an [import map](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script/type/importmap), allowing you to customize how module specifiers are resolved.
- **`_stylesheets`** (List[str | PurePath] | None): This optional attribute accepts a list of CSS strings or paths to CSS files. It supports automatic reloading in development environments.

:::note

You may specify a path to a file as a string instead of a PurePath. The path should be specified relative to the file its specified in.

:::

#### `render` Function

The `_esm` attribute must export the `render` function. It accepts the following parameters:

- **`model`**: Represents the Parameters of the component and provides methods to add (and remove) event listeners using `.on` and `.off`, render child React components using `.get_child`, get a state hook for a parameter value using `.useState` and to `.send_event` back to Python.
- **`view`**: The Bokeh view.
- **`el`**: The HTML element that the component will be rendered into.

Any React component returned from the `render` function will be appended to the HTML element (`el`) of the component.

### State Hooks

The recommended approach to build components that depend on parameters in Python is to create [`useState` hooks](https://react.dev/reference/react/useState) by calling `model.useState('<parameter>')`. The `model.useState` method returns an array with exactly two values:

1. The current state. During the first render, it will match the initialState you have passed.
2. The set function that lets you update the state to a different value and trigger a re-render.

Using the state value in your React component will automatically re-render the component when it is updated.

### Callbacks

The `model.on` and `model.off` methods allow registering event handlers inside the render function. This includes the ability to listen to parameter changes and register lifecycle hooks.

#### Change Events

The following signatures are valid when listening to change events:

- `.on('<parameter>', callback)`: Allows registering an event handler for a single parameter.
- `.on(['<parameter>', ...], callback)`: Allows adding an event handler for multiple parameters at once.
- `.on('change:<parameter>', callback)`: The `change:` prefix allows disambiguating change events from lifecycle hooks should a parameter name and lifecycle hook overlap.

#### Lifecycle Hooks

- `after_layout`: Called once after the component is fully laid out.
- `remove`: Called when the component view is being removed from the DOM.

## Usage

### Styling with CSS

Include CSS within the `_stylesheets` attribute to style the component. The CSS is injected directly into the component's HTML.

```pyodide
import panel as pn
import param

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class CounterButton(ReactComponent):

    value = param.Integer()

    _stylesheets = [
        """
        button {
            background: #0072B5;
            color: white;
            border: none;
            padding: 10px;
            border-radius: 4px;
        }
        button:hover {
            background: #4099da;
        }
        """
    ]

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
      const [value, setValue] = model.useState("value");
      return (
        <button onClick={e => setValue(value+1)}>
          count is {value}
        </button>
    );
    }
    """

CounterButton().servable()
```

## Send Events from JavaScript to Python

Events from JavaScript can be sent to Python using the `model.send_event` method. Define a handler in Python to manage these events. A *handler* is a method on the form `_handle_<name-of-event>(self, event)`:

```pyodide
import panel as pn
import param

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class EventExample(ReactComponent):

    value = param.Parameter()

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
    return (
        <button onClick={e => model.send_event('click', e) }>
          Click me
        </button>
    );
    }
    """

    def _handle_click(self, event):
       self.value = str(event.__dict__)

button = EventExample()
pn.Column(
    button, pn.widgets.TextAreaInput(value=button.param.value, height=200),
).servable()
```

You can also define and send your own custom events:

```pyodide
import datetime

import panel as pn
import param

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class CustomEventExample(ReactComponent):

    value = param.String()

    _esm = """
    function send_event(model) {
      const currentDate = new Date();
      const custom_event = new CustomEvent("click", { detail: currentDate.getTime() });
      model.send_event('click', custom_event)
    }

    export function render({ model }) {
    return (
        <button onClick={e => send_event(model) }>
          Click me
        </button>
    );
    }
    """

    def _handle_click(self, event):
        unix_timestamp = event.data["detail"]/1000
        python_datetime = datetime.datetime.fromtimestamp(unix_timestamp)
        self.value = str(python_datetime)

button = CustomEventExample()
pn.Column(
    button, button.param.value,
).servable()
```

## Dependency Imports

JavaScript dependencies can be directly imported via URLs, such as those from [`esm.sh`](https://esm.sh/).

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class ConfettiButton(ReactComponent):

    _esm = """
    import confetti from "https://esm.sh/canvas-confetti@1.6.0";

    export function render() {
      return (
        <button onClick={e => confetti()}>
          Click Me
        </button>
    );
    }
    """

ConfettiButton().servable()
```

Use the `_importmap` attribute for more concise module references.

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class ConfettiButton(ReactComponent):
    _importmap = {
        "imports": {
            "canvas-confetti": "https://esm.sh/canvas-confetti@1.6.0",
        }
    }

    _esm = """
    import confetti from "canvas-confetti";

    export function render() {
      return (
        <button onClick={e => confetti()}>
          Click Me
        </button>
      );
    }
    """

ConfettiButton().servable()
```

See [import map](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script/type/importmap) for more info about the import map format.

## External Files

You can load JSX and CSS from files by providing the paths to these files.

Create the file **counter_button.py**.

```python
from pathlib import Path

import param
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class CounterButton(ReactComponent):

    value = param.Integer()

    _esm = "counter_button.jsx"
    _stylesheets = [Path("counter_button.css")]

CounterButton().servable()
```

Now create the file **counter_button.jsx**.

```javascript
export function render({ model }) {
  const [value, setValue] = model.useState("value");
  return (
    <button onClick={e => setValue(value+1)}>
      count is {value}
    </button>
  );
}
```

Now create the file **counter_button.css**.

```css
button {
    background: #0072B5;
    color: white;
    border: none;
    padding: 10px;
    border-radius: 4px;
}
button:hover {
    background: #4099da;
}
```

Serve the app with `panel serve counter_button.py --autoreload`.

You can now edit the JSX or CSS file, and the changes will be automatically reloaded.

- Try changing `count is {value}` to `COUNT IS {value}` and observe the update.
- Try changing the background color from `#0072B5` to `#008080`.

## Displaying A Single Child

You can display Panel components (`Viewable`s) by defining a `Child` parameter.

Lets start with the simplest example

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import Child, ReactComponent

class Example(ReactComponent):

    child = Child()

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
      return <button>{model.get_child("child")}</button>
    }
    """

Example(child=pn.panel("A **Markdown** pane!")).servable()
```

If you provide a non-`Viewable` child it will automatically be converted to a `Viewable` by `pn.panel`:

```pyodide
Example(child="A **Markdown** pane!").servable()
```

If you want to allow a certain type of Panel components only you can specify the specific type in the `class_` argument.

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import Child, ReactComponent

class Example(ReactComponent):

    child = Child(class_=pn.pane.Markdown)

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
      return <button>{model.get_child("child")}</button>
    }
    """

Example(child=pn.panel("A **Markdown** pane!")).servable()
```

The `class_` argument also supports a tuple of types:

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import Child, ReactComponent

class Example(ReactComponent):

    child = Child(class_=(pn.pane.Markdown, pn.pane.HTML))

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
      return <button>{model.get_child("child")}</button>
    }
    """

Example(child=pn.panel("A **Markdown** pane!")).servable()
```

## Displaying a List of Children

You can also display a `List` of `Viewable` objects using the `Children` parameter type:

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import Children, ReactComponent

class Example(ReactComponent):

    objects = Children()

    _esm = """
    export function render({ model }) {
      return <div>{model.get_child("objects")}</div>
    }"""


Example(
    objects=[pn.panel("A **Markdown** pane!"), pn.widgets.Button(name="Click me!"), {"text": "I'm shown as a JSON Pane"}]
).servable()
```

:::note

You can change the `item_type` to a specific subtype of `Viewable` or a tuple of
`Viewable` subtypes.

:::

## Using React Hooks

The global namespace also contains a `React` object that provides access to React hooks. Here is an example of a simple counter button using the `useState` hook:

```pyodide
import panel as pn

from panel.custom import ReactComponent

pn.extension()

class CounterButton(ReactComponent):

    _esm = """
    let { useState } = React;

    export function render() {
      const [value, setValue] = useState(0);
      return (
        <button onClick={e => setValue(value+1)}>
          count is {value}
        </button>
      );
    }
    """

CounterButton().servable()
```

## References

### Tutorials

- [Build Custom Components](../../../how_to/custom_components/reactive_esm/reactive_esm_layout.md)

### How-To Guides

- [Convert `AnyWidget` widgets](../../../how_to/migrate/anywidget/index.md)

### Reference Guides

- [`AnyWidgetComponent`](../../../reference/panes/AnyWidgetComponent.md)
- [`JSComponent`](../../../reference/panes/JSComponent.md)
- [`ReactComponent`](../../../reference/panes/ReactComponent.md)
